On the request of Doctor Village Mayor San
Antonio. He asked me to present to you a tape. Of
some of the reasons why I went to veterinary school
where I started my type of practice and this type of
thing. I would try to put this in some kind of form. I
will also send you a copy of my resume so maybe you
can. Put it all together from this tape and also
from. my resume. I was born and raised in Amarillo,
Texas, and lived in Texas Panhandle all my life,
basically a city boy. I worked on a local ranch
during the summer months, but I made most of my
spending money doing construction work with a
local construction company in Amarillo. Upon
graduation from high school I
joined the United States Marine Corps was in the
Marine Corps for two years and after that I
returned to go to Texas Tech to play in a football
with the on a football scholarship I was there for a
year and Met my wife, married in 1959, and she was
going to school in Amarillo at Northwest Texas
Nursing School. So I transferred back to West
Texas State University and started in a general ag
degree program. While I was in general ag, I had a
professor ask me what I was going to be able to do
once I graduated from college. Just being a city
boy and not having a ranch background or farm
background or someplace I could go, I was
concerned about what my program could be. My wife
suggested I go to veterinary school since I was
constantly visiting with veterinarians and
going on calls with them. So in January of 1961,
we transferred to College Station to start
attending Texas A&M University.
There in Texas A&M, I graduated in August 1965. And
upon graduation, I returned to Amarillo
primarily in equine practice. During this equine
practice, I also did the excess swine work and
bovine work. And during this time, I got very much
interested in doing swine herd health
management, which gave me a good background as far
as what happened into my practice as I got into
doing bovine herd health management. But I was
there at this equine practice for nine months. I
decided I wanted to get out on my own. So I went to a
small town 65 miles southwest of Amarillo, a town
called Demet. So we moved to Demet in June of 1966
and set up a general practice. I was the first
veterinarian to ever set up practice in Demet.
There were a few that had been through Demet and
done some work around Demet, but we were the first
to start. And it was fun times whenever you try to go
into a small town and set up a business the way we
did. Small town of 5,000 people. They were very
open, very receptive. and very helpful in while we
were doing our practice. While I was in Demet, the
feeding industry in the Texas Panhandle started
booming and therefore I started doing some
so-called feedlot medicine in some of these feed
yards. There was primarily still a fire engine
type calls going to do autopsies of the dead
cattle. But as we got more involved, we became more
involved in the management aspects and tried to
set up herd health programs. During all this time
also, I was getting more and more involved in the
swine herd health consultation. I was doing
DCAB's work out of Illinois. They were setting up
some large, to finish operations in Plains,
Kansas. And so I was doing their work primarily in
Plains. And during this time, I was learning about
how to set up a herd health management program.
Then as we got a little more involved in Dimit, we
developed our practice into a three-person
practice. and I was doing more and more of the herd
health management or feedlot consultation. So in
June of 1974, actually in January 1974, we sold our
practice to my partner and I wanted to set up just a
straight herd health consultation practice. I
stayed in Demet from January to June till the kids
got out of high school and then we transferred over
to Canyon in June of 1974 and set up just a herd
health consultation practice. At this time all I
had was an office and my pickup and an airplane and
was doing primarily feedlots in the 150 mile
radius of Amarillo, but also had some others in
South Texas and up in Wyoming. So as we got more
involved in the consultation, we also had to do
more traveling. I made a decision in 1976 to quit
doing any swine consultation and devote myself to
full-time feedlot herd health consultation. So
we went from a general practice into swine and
feedlot consultation practice. Now we call
ourselves adjunct manager of animal health in a
herd health management program. So we've seen
several different kinds of changes in our
practice and our thoughts of how we should provide
veterinary medicine to some of our clients.
While I was in veterinary school, there was not
anything being taught on herd health
consultation, not only in swine, but definitely
not in feedlots. The feedlot industry really
didn't start booming until about 1965 in the Texas
Panhandle. So I was very weak in the herd health
consultation program, and the swine, like I
mentioned earlier, the The swine practice was a
good stepping stone because of their advancement
in the herd health consultation. But at the same
time, it made me get interested in organized
veterinary medicine because that was one place to
get educated. So I was involved with the swine
practitioners at the beginning, was a charter
member of the swine practitioners. and then
joined the bovine practitioners right out of
school in 1965. Same way with the AVMA. And we were
constantly trying to put different programs
primarily about feedlot medicine with our local
veterinary association. Then at the same time, we
got involved with the Texas Veterinary Medical
Association and set up uh, feedlot committees,
uh, feedlot programs, and could see where not only
would, uh, herd health management consultation,
feedlot management, so to speak, uh, it wasn't
just tied into one type of practice. It could be
applied also into a dairy practice, into stocker
practice, cow calf practice. So there was a lot of
good things were coming out of this and, and got
deeply involved in, organized veterinary
medicine. We formed a group called the Academy of
Veterinary Consultants in Amarillo just for this
purpose in 1972. And so here again, this was where
we started getting our education in becoming
feedlot veterinarians. Another thing that was a
big problem in herd health consultation, the
feedlot medicine was the lack of records. Most of
these feedlots had some type of record system for
accounting purposes, for figuring out the cost to
gain, feed efficiency, and billing purposes to
their customers. But no one really had a program to
set up for evaluating the health of the animals. So
we started putting records together and trying to
come up a way where we could evaluate our herd
health programs and at the same time come up with a
goal setting session and have some records to show
whether we were going to be able to make these goals
or not. We started off with hand records. Then we
started getting into The computer age, but prior
to for floppies and laptop computers, this type of
thing ever came available, we started using a
DEC-10 program out of West Texas State
University. We had a telephone modem in our office
hooked up straight to the West Texas State
University computer office, and we developed a
system called the Cadillac counting system. this
cattle counting system we can evaluate our
processing programs our treatment programs
evaluate the origin of the cattle and set up some
good good programs and and today this thing is
still existence we started this thing at first
with the wt program and as we got bigger we could
find out that we needed to get off that because it
cost us too much money on a monthly lease. So we went
into the
small computers, the floppy disk, and the program
was so large on the deck 10, it took us almost two
years to get it transferred over into the floppy.
But now we do have this in use and are using it in our
practice. I use it on a routine basis myself with
the feedlots that I'm consulting with. And as far
as I know, back when we did this, it was the first
herd health record system designed for a feedlot
herd health program. Now as we get more and more
involved in our feedlot programs, The drug
companies were coming to us to try to evaluate
different products. And so I went ahead and
started a small research farm in 1979 and 1980. I
had a small facility where I could handle about 80
head of cattle. And as the drug companies became
involved and found out that I was interested in
doing applied research in cattle, we started
getting more requests. And so we've grown now from
80 head capacity research facility to 2,500 head
research facility. We started out primarily
doing pharmaceuticals, but now we are doing not
only pharmaceuticals but biologicals. feed
additives, growth promotings, which includes
the implants, this type of thing. We started out
primarily in cattle. We did a little bit of horse
research, and now we also have facilities where we
can do swine research. So it seems like we've gone
in a complete circle. Started out with general
practice in Demet, built that practice up to a
three-person practice. Now we're back into a
general practice again. One time we had six people
in our program. Now we're just back to three. But we
have a veterinarian running the general practice
in town, which includes small animal, horses,
cattle.
We have one veterinarian doing primarily nothing
but consultation. And then I'm doing
consultation plus the research facility. So That
kind of gives you a little bit of an idea of what
we've done over the years since graduation and
trying to figure out how we can be of more service to
our clients and provide a good program in herd
health management.
Another aspect of our business that I've been
excited about was back in 1974, I was contacted by
3M Company to be a consultant with them on some new
products, new ideas. One of the ideas they had was a
compressed air rifle that shoots a biodegradable
bullet, which contains a life-size dry vaccine.
and use this in cattle to help eliminate some
stress and some of the other things that are
involved as far as when trying to vaccinate cattle
in a pasture situation. So I was consulting from
them for a year and a half. Then as this became more
of a product rather than an idea, a company called
Blistavet, was formed. A list of that is out of
Minneapolis St. Paul. Mr. Fred Paul, who put this
idea together, is the one that started the
company. And he bought the rights from 3M. And
during all this time, there was about $3 million
spent on just the development of it. It took from, I
said 1974, but I meant 1972. From 1972 to about
1976, being in development, 76 to 84, it was pretty
much put on a shelf and not used. 84, Fred Paul
purchased the selling rights of this company and
formed his own company, BlistaVet. And in 1985, I
was hired as an advisor with BlistaVet to work on
this new compressed air rifle idea. And now we have
been working with them since 1985, been working on
new product development, trying to put a
marketing scheme together so other
veterinarians can be aware of this program and
this system. Also on the advisory stage is a FDA
liaison person with my contact with the FDA from a
research program and a feedlot program. I also
work with the FDA for BallistaVet in trying to set
up new protocols and get some of these products
approved. And at the same time we also, with these
products, we work on the research end of it here at
the research farm. So that has been a very
interesting part in trying to develop new ideas
and new products. I'm also getting more and more
involved with international consultation. This
looks like this might be some value and interest as
we get further and further along into our
programs. I was just just returned from South
Africa and was over there for 30 days. I was hired by
a veterinarian and 14 other companies to come over
and go through their feedlot program with them.
That's one of the best unknown secrets in the
world, I believe, over there. They're the second
largest cattle feeding country in the world,
besides the United States and Canada. And they've
got a very viable, very interesting industry. And
I was able to go over there and spend 30 days with
them, and going through their program,
evaluating them, and looking at the way they do
things. We're very spoiled in the United States.
We have a lot of biologics, a lot of
pharmaceuticals, and there's things that we can
do in the United States that they can't do because
they don't have these products available. At the
present time, all they have is an inactivated IBR,
an intradermal Pasteurella, and TSV-2
intranasal IBR-PI3. During my visit while I was
there, we also worked with the drug companies
which were also help sponsoring the program and
show them the type of programs we were using in the
United States and some of the things they needed to
do there. So we are able to develop new tools for
these people while we were there and give them some
new things that they can utilize in their program.
That has been very interesting to do some
international work. Also, I'm getting involved
with a society called American Society of Ag
Consultants out of Washington, DC. Here again,
they have a domestic program, the United States
program, but they also have a lot of international
work. So I think down the line, international
consultation will be something that we as
veterinarians will have to offer to some of these
other countries of some of the things that we are
doing in the United States. If you have any
questions over any of this, please don't hesitate
to call. I hope these tapes will be of some value to
you. Thank you.